apps/web/pages/docs/installation.mdx, before:

import { Callout } from "nextra-theme-docs";
import { Steps } from "nextra/components";
import { Tabs } from "nextra/components";

# Installation

Supported Platforms:

- All desktop and mobile browsers
- Electron
- React Native

Requirements:

- TypeScript 5.0 or newer
- The `strict` flag enabled in your `tsconfig.json` file

<Steps>
### Choose Framework

Examples: [Next.js](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/nextjs),
[Vite](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/vite),
[Electron](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/electron-app),
[Expo](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/apps/native),
[Remix](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/remix).

### Install Evolu

<Tabs items={["React", "React Native", "All other Frameworks"]}>
  <Tabs.Tab>

    ```bash filename="Terminal"
      npm install @evolu/react
    ```

  </Tabs.Tab>
  <Tabs.Tab>

    ```bash filename="Terminal"
      npm install @evolu/react-native
    ```

  </Tabs.Tab>
  <Tabs.Tab>

    ```bash filename="Terminal"
      npm install @evolu/common @evolu/common-web
    ```

  </Tabs.Tab>
</Tabs>

### Add Settings

Remember to check [examples](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples)
for additional required settings like polyfills, etc.

<Callout type="warning" emoji="‼️">
  For the web, remember to set COOP and COEP HTTP Headers.
  [Example](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/blob/main/examples/nextjs/next.config.js)
</Callout>

</Steps>

Commit message:

Remove coop-coep headers from examples

apps/web/pages/docs/installation.mdx, after:

import { Callout } from "nextra-theme-docs";
import { Steps } from "nextra/components";
import { Tabs } from "nextra/components";

# Installation

Supported Platforms:

- All desktop and mobile browsers
- Electron
- React Native

Requirements:

- TypeScript 5.0 or newer
- The `strict` flag enabled in your `tsconfig.json` file

<Steps>
### Install Evolu

<Tabs items={["React", "React Native", "All other Frameworks"]}>
  <Tabs.Tab>

    ```bash filename="Terminal"
      npm install @evolu/react
    ```

  </Tabs.Tab>
  <Tabs.Tab>

    ```bash filename="Terminal"
      npm install @evolu/react-native
    ```

  </Tabs.Tab>
  <Tabs.Tab>

    ```bash filename="Terminal"
      npm install @evolu/common @evolu/common-web
    ```

  </Tabs.Tab>
</Tabs>

### Check Examples

Examples: [Next.js](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/nextjs),
[Vite](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/vite),
[Electron](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/electron-app),
[Expo](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/apps/native),
[Remix](https://github.com/evoluhq/evolu/tree/main/examples/remix).

Remember to check examples for additional settings.

### Read Docs

While Evolu API is simple, the local-first concept brings new design patterns.

Everything should be described in Evolu docs, but if you are not sure about something,
feel free to ask in our [Evolu Discord](https://discord.gg/2J8yyyyxtZ).

</Steps>
