apps/web/src/app/(docs)/docs/library/page.mdx, before:

import { IconBrandNpm } from "@tabler/icons-react";

export const metadata = {
  title: "Get started with the library",
};

# Get started with the library

This guide will get you up and running with Evolu Library.

<Note>
  Requirements: `TypeScript 5.7` or later with the `strict` flag enabled in
  `tsconfig.json` file.
</Note>

## Installation

```bash
npm install @evolu/common
```

## Learning path

We recommend learning Evolu Library in this order:

### 1. Result – Error handling

Start with [`Result`](/docs/api-reference/common/Result/type-aliases/Result), which provides a type-safe way to handle errors without exceptions. It's the foundation for composable error handling throughout Evolu.

### 2. Task – Asynchronous operations

Learn [`Task`](/docs/api-reference/common/Task/interfaces/Task), which represents asynchronous computations in a lazy, composable way.

### 3. Type – Runtime validation

Understand the [`Type`](/docs/api-reference/common/Type) system for runtime validation and parsing. This enables you to enforce constraints at compile-time and validate untrusted data at runtime.

### 4. Dependency injection

Explore the [dependency injection pattern](/docs/dependency-injection) used throughout Evolu for decoupled, testable code.

### 5. Resource management

Learn [resource management](/docs/resource-management) with `using`, `DisposableStack`, and how it integrates with `Result` for reliable cleanup.

### 6. Conventions

Review the [Evolu conventions](/docs/conventions) to understand the codebase style and patterns.

## Exploring the API

After understanding the core concepts, explore the full API in the [API reference](/docs/api-reference/common). All code is commented and test files are written to be read as examples—they demonstrate practical usage patterns and edge cases.

Commit message:

Update library docs and navigation for Array section
Revised the library documentation to introduce the Array section as the first step in the learning path, updated descriptions for core concepts, and added the Array link to the navigation menu.

apps/web/src/app/(docs)/docs/library/page.mdx, after:

import { IconBrandNpm } from "@tabler/icons-react";

export const metadata = {
  title: "Get started with the library",
};

# Get started with the library

This guide will help you get started with the Evolu Library.

<Note>
  Requirements: `TypeScript 5.7` or later with the `strict` flag enabled in
  `tsconfig.json` file.
</Note>

## Installation

```bash
npm install @evolu/common
```

## Learning path

We recommend learning the Evolu Library in this order:

### 1. Array

Start with [`Array`](/docs/api-reference/common/Array), which provides helpers for improved type-safety and developer experience.

### 2. Result

Learn [`Result`](/docs/api-reference/common/Result/type-aliases/Result), a type-safe way to handle errors. It's the foundation for composable error handling.

### 3. Task

Continue with [`Task`](/docs/api-reference/common/Task/interfaces/Task) for structured concurrency (promises that can be aborted, monitored, and do not leak).

### 4. Type

Check the [`Type`](/docs/api-reference/common/Type) to enforce constraints at compile-time and validate data at runtime.

### 5. Dependency injection

Explore [dependency injection](/docs/dependency-injection), the pattern Evolu uses to swap implementations and simplify testing.

### 6. Resource management

See [resource management](/docs/resource-management) — `using`, `DisposableStack`, and how it integrates with `Result` for reliable cleanup.

### 7. Conventions

Review the [Evolu conventions](/docs/conventions) to understand the codebase style and patterns.

## Exploring the API

After understanding the core concepts, explore the full API in the [API reference](/docs/api-reference/common). All code is commented, and tests are written to be read as examples—they demonstrate practical usage patterns and edge cases.
